 Hello! Today we're going to look at Mamba Linear Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces by Albert Gu and Tri Dao. I know I'm a bit late on this paper, but I still thought I'd give it a look and excuse the lack of face scanning today. I know it's a tragic loss to not see my face while doing these reviews. I hope you can survive it. So Mamba has been really big, hailed as a potential competitor to Transformers, has better scaling properties, scales to really long sequences, so on. And yeah, I wanted to know what it is and I wanted to know essentially two things, like how How does it differ from all the other stuff that exists today? Because there's so much stuff. For example, there are the transformers. And those obviously have their advantages and problems. Then there are RNNs, current neural networks. And then there are these state-space models like S4 or something like this. And there's always interesting trade-offs between all of those. notably what we'll see is in the transformer you have if you have a sequence of stuff you have attention that's essentially anything can look at anything else if you have causal attention if i look at this input i'm able to selectively look back at another input and sort of use that in the computation of the next layer here. So a transformer is able to dynamically and selectively look at individual elements of the past and address each one individually. But obviously you have a problem with that. So the problem with that is that you have like L squared when L is the sequence length. L squared computations or N slash or N L squared memory requirements in order to do this. RNNs, on the other hand, if you have a sequence there, they, if you consider this particular input and you want to compute the next layer, you can only look back one time step. In fact, you can't even look at the last input. you what you will do is from each input you will compute a hidden state so there's going to be some sort of a box here and you will update the box and then the next thing will come and it will update the box and then the next thing will come and it will update the box and so on so you're only allowed to look at the last box and the current input if you want to decide what the next box here should be. From the box you obviously then compute the outputs. So this is super restrictive in that you can only ever look at the last hidden state and the current input in order to compute the current output and the next hidden state. But also, also, this essentially scales to infinite lengths because it, instead of having, you know, this much requirement of memory, it only has, actually it doesn't even it has l computation so you compute as many elements as you have right but then the memory requirements are really they're really all they're really only how big is the hidden state and how big are the inputs and outputs now if you want to do backprop here that's when it becomes you know a bit more iffy then you will actually have to remember the whole sequence of intermediate values in order to backprop the gates of RNNs, use a thing that's called backprop through time. And I know, I know, this is super old school and before most of you were born, but again, consider the thing where you compute the hidden state out of the last hidden state and the current input, you compute the next hidden state from that, and eventually you'll have some sort of output. Let's say the whole sequence only has one output, you can do this with many outputs to but what you want to know is well how does the weights that compute this particular transition here or this particular one how should i change that because i have some sort of loss over here well you need to backprop through all of these computations so through all of the computations that generate the hidden states from each other and then back through this computation in order to do that. That's called backprop through time. And because you backprop through so many time steps, this is often either prohibitively expensive memory-wise, or you'll just get this vanishing or exploding gradient problems because essentially you have operation upon operation upon operation, which are often multiplications. Solutions to that are things like the LSTM that have built-in gating mechanisms. But the important part to know is there is a hidden state and that goes through some transfer. So there is a function and the function of the next hidden state, t plus one, depends on the last hidden state and the current input. And this function here, it can be pretty much anything. In an LSTM, it's a complicated gating thing. In a simple recurrent network, it's just I multiply the last hidden state by some weight, and then this by some weight. But it is a... And then I add a non-linearity or something like this. Now, what about this S4 type of thing? And that's where this paper starts off. This paper starts off by saying, hey, look, these state-space models, they've been pretty we've built some of these and they have some nice properties what are those nice properties the nice properties are that they essentially are an rnn essentially but when they have a sequence and uh sequence of inputs they can essentially compute all of the outputs if there are multiple outputs or that single output over here in one swoop so they can essentially compute it like zoom in one big swoop and so if they have all the inputs they can just formulate this as a convolution operator and there are multiple reasons why that's the case but two main reasons First reason, there is no non-linearity going from the last hidden state to the next hidden state. So this is a completely linear transition, if you will. We'll go a little bit into what I mean by this, obviously, here. Here, some kind of x is coming in, and that doesn't necessarily need to be linear. but sort of the backbone of this going through time from hidden state to hidden state are linear computations. So no non-linearity involved in that. What that will mean is that essentially this whole path here, this whole backprop through time thing, is going to be at least a path that goes back to hidden states until it branches off into the individual elements. that is essentially one big matrix multiple like one big linear operation and that is a lot more well behaved than if you also have the non-linearities in between now obviously you can still have exploding or vanishing gradients and so on so you could also you can still have that but it is a lot more easy let's say than having complicated gating mechanisms there and what it means is that you can just kind of jump ahead to any point that you want because you can always you always know what the full operation is you always have a closed form to that um second okay what's second uh there is no time dependence so there's no time uh dependence of these things and no input dependence. What that means is that the transition from state 1 to state 2 is going to be the same as the transition from state 2 to state 3. Now again, there is going to be inputs in these that obviously don't always compute the same function, but the transition between the time steps and how you incorporate new information is always the same. So all the matrices that are involved in here essentially are all the same and not dependent on the input at all and therefore you can just kind of pre-compute all of the aggregation right here and then all you have to do is kind of multiply in your individual inputs from the time steps and you can just compute the whole thing as as one big computation so that's what we're going to look at the question is where do the these where does mamba fit in mamba is an architecture that makes use of what they call selective state spaces and selective state spaces relaxes this property of s4 of it and what i mean by the property that the transition from time step to time step is independent of the input it relaxes that a little bit and therefore it moves s4 a little bit closer into the direction of LSTMs. But it remains, it retains this property that the backbone here is computable by one swoop. They're going to do this as a prefix sum, it's a parallel scan it's it's computable as one swoop and therefore during training it looks more like a transformer where you can just compute all of the forward passes of the whole sequence in one go instead of like the lstm where the forward pass no matter whether you know all the inputs already but you have to compute the forward pass one after another so during training it looks more like a transformer and during inference it actually looks more like a cast yeah all right so we'll dive into the paper and i just i have a few sections highlighted not too much especially the experimental results you're very welcome to look at those the result is going to be that it is a strong competitor to transformers so far they have not made experiments up to the bigs like up to the big transformers and big i believe they have made experiments up to about 1 billion parameters that's obviously really big in conventional terms but for language modeling uh the smallest ones start at like 7 billion so that remains to be seen but the scaling laws seem promising the other thing is that they say themselves it really excels at when you need really really long sequences like the dna modeling or audio waveforms and so on they're having a long context and being efficient with that is probably more important than this you know super ability to of transformers to focus in on individual states all right so they say structured states-based models sorry have developed to address transformers computational efficiency on long sequences but they've not performed as well as attention in important modalities such as language. We identify that a key weakness of such models is their inability to perform context-based reasoning. What does that mean? They say we propose a new class of selective state-based models, right, the selective is the difference instead of the structured, that improves on prior work on several axes to achieve the modeling power of transformers while scaling linearly in sequence length. So, they say the key limitation of prior models, the ability to efficiently select data in an input-dependent manner. Again, what does that mean? You have a previous hidden state, you have a current input, and you want to build the next hidden state, t plus one. what structured state space models do is they'll have some kind of parameterized function, let's call that a and they'll have some sort of they'll have some sort here, let's call that b even though it's slightly different and the result is going to be that ht plus 1 is going to be equal to something like a ht plus b x okay again not exact representation but in principle this and this is in ssm's life is going to be completely fixed for the whole sequence always so you learn one set of parameters for one a and one b for the entire model now this obviously is very very different from transformers where a like the attention matrix is built dynamically at each single forward pass you know for each single uh for each single token queries and keys and values and therefore the aggregation how you build the next hidden state is very dependent on on everything on the input on the past so on in this particular case super fixed you can see this is even more restrictive than something like an lstm like in something like an LSTM, as we discussed before, what you can do is you can make this and this actually dependent on the last hidden state. So in an LSTM, you'll see that the last hidden state will be transformed into, and then this gives you the A matrix, like in some sort of a gating way, and then x will be multiplied by a and so on. So I don't have an LSTM cell in my head, but in an LSTM, the propagation of the signals can be dependent on the previous hidden state and on the input. And that's the difference between the state-space models and the fully general recurrent neural networks. what mamba is going to do mamba is going to say we allow the transition to be dependent on the current input not on the previous hidden state but on the current input and you should already be able to see if you do that it still means that this backbone going from hidden state to next hidden state is going to be a fixed computation given by this A matrix and that's why we can sort of pre-compute it throughout all of time because that A is going to be fixed and not dependent on the input. Although what we'll see is that in fact how the input is computed into the next hidden state is going to be influenced by the by the but not by the previous hidden state so I hope I've made this clear a is going to be dependent on the input B is going to be dependent on the input but they're not going to be dependent on the last hidden state or anything of the past So it's kind of a trade-off between the state-based models of the past and recurrent neural networks. So they say, okay, this poses a challenge for the computation of the model. All prior SSM models must be time and input invariant in order to be computationally efficient. we overcome this hardware aware algorithm that computes the model currently with a scan instead of a convolution so they say essentially we sort of make it really fast on gpu even though we have an algorithmically a different with a different algorithm we need to compute something making the actual recurrence or actually recurrently but we do it in a way that fits really well onto gpus and therefore it's actually in the end it's actually faster and yeah they make this into a model called mamba mamba is mamba is not the same as selective state spaces selective state space are a part of mamba and then combined with some other stuff like like 1D convolutions and up-projections and gating, that becomes the Mamba architecture. It's attention-free. Therefore, it avoids the quadratic bottlenecks of attention-based models such as transformers. So they say these are fully recurrent models with the key property, for example, high quality selectivity brings strong performance and depth on dense modalities such as language and genomics i think that's going to be the biggest sticking points so they have recognized that you know this super scalable thing like s4 is not really suitable for language because you need to be a little bit data dependent in your transitions from you know through the hidden states and now they say well selectivity brings strong performance which because they added selectivity they added this dependence on the input of transition now gives them a bump in performance the jury's still out whether in the future they'll say yeah it's better but still in order to really reach the performance of transformers we also need to make that transition actually dependent on the hidden states. And at that point, we're back to essentially LSTMs. But it could be that the dependence on the input, just the input, already makes them as strong as transformers on a lot of important benchmarks. Fast training and inference. Computational memory scales linearly in sequence length during training and unrolling the model auto-regressively during inference requires only constant time per step since it does not require a cache of previous elements. So there's no key value cache like in Transformers. You literally just have to remember the last hidden state and then producing one additional token during inference is just two matrix multiplications or something like this. So no attention, no nothing. You just multiply it in and you have it. And long context, the quality and efficiency together give the performance improvements on real data up to sequence length on building. All right, so this is, the architecture is a bit distributed throughout the paper. This is the selective state space part of this. There's going to be a more extensive thing here. So the Mamba architecture consists of the part I've just shown you but also of other things so you have to imagine these things are going to be layered on top of one another and then essentially you'll always consider the entire sequence as one during training so if we go in here this here for example this is a linear projection so you project up in dimensions you project each token individually like in a transformer then you do a 1D convolution, there is some non-linearity in there, then comes that SSM. Now in these two things, you want to consider the whole sequence as one during training, right? However, in the projections right here, they, as far as I understand, go just individually over tokens like the MLPs and the transformer. And then there is also this extra mechanism right here, which is a gating mechanism like you're used to from other gated architectures again this doesn't go between time steps that's important to note this goes from layer to layer right so as you go up the layers the time would be sort of time steps aren't even shown there's no time direction in this particular diagram there is also residual connections like that go out out the way and so on um yeah so So the mamba is an architecture that includes this new selective state spaces. That selective state space layer looks about like this. And here we now have a time direction. So here we now consider how do we compute one token in this sequence, given that we have to accumulate this hidden state over time. And again, we can do this either during training, where we try to compute all of them as fast as possible, or during inference, where we just do one of these time steps. So as you can see, the backbone is just going to be, we have this, we multiply, essentially there is this A matrix right here that we're going to use, and there is the input that somehow comes in, and from these two things we're going to produce that next hidden state. Now what is all of this right here? All of this is part of this state-space architecture. How does that look? There is a technicality in here which is called discretization. Now the theory behind state-space models and so on was developed for continuous time systems and if you want to make them discreet you if you want to be sort of correct you can't just you can't just apply the same thing if you do it in the way they do it here it has some nice properties such as I believe you're time step independent you automatically scale the things to the correct scaling so on however whenever you hear discretization just you're free to also just kind of ignore it for the purposes of understanding what's going on from a deep learning perspective and from a data flow perspective i'm sorry albert if you're listening this must be really offensive and i apologize for that we can do another video where we dive into sort of to more of the background behind these models and so on. I'm maybe not the best person to explain that, but we'll do our best to understand kind of what's going on here on a more high level. So you have, they call them four parameters, okay? These are matrices or vectors that just have learnable parameters. You'll use, this here is the sort of like a parameterization parameterization, no sorry, discretization parameters. This here controls how one hidden state is propagated forward. This here controls how much of the input is propagated into the new hidden state. And this here controls how the hidden state is processed into the output state. So you can see the next hidden state is produced from the last hidden state multiplied by what's of A bar. A bar is simply a computation that results from this discretization parameter and the A matrix. Again don't worry, just consider if you want to just consider this here to be a learnable matrix and this here to be a learnable matrix. And in that you can see from this perspective this is a super duper simple like the most plain recurrent neural network there is without even some any sort of non-linearity around here you can see this is just like a linear recurrent neural network if you will where you just kind of dampen in some way in some multi-dimensional way the last hidden state and then you add a a projected version of the input the output is simply computed again as a linear function of the hidden state. Now, since everything is linear, what you can do is, if you actually write this out, if you actually write that, I want to compute, sorry, I want to compute y3. Let me erase. If you compute y3, you can say, oh, well, that's just h3, ah3 plus bx3. Oh, but what's h3? Well, h3 is just a h2. Oh, sorry, y is not multiplied by c, right? Well, that's just a h2 plus b x2. And what's h2? Well, that's just a h1 plus b x1. And so if I plug all of this in, I'm going to end up with y3 is equal to c times, let's see, times a times a times a h1 let's say that's the initial hidden state so you can see you can multiply this out what you'll end up with is like you'll end up with like c a a a a b x1 c plus c a a a b x2 and so on so plus c a a b x3 so that there's kind of the number of a's just different depending on how many time steps that particular x is in the past but you can see i can multiply all of this out and what that allows me to do it that allows me to say well all of this here is just constant no not this all without x all of these matrices here are just constant learnable parameters this too this too so I can just consider this as a vector a dot product of C A A A A B C A A A B C A A B and so on with X 1 X 2 X 3 and so on and this here I can perfectly pre-compute you know i just after each learning step uh these these are just learned parameters therefore i can perfectly pre-compute that and when a new sequence comes i just dot product it in and i have the full output i have the output available instantly and that's what they do over here so you can see they build this kernel out of this and then they could say well the output is simply going to be I multiply the input as a vector by my kernel. And, ba-da-boom, I just have it all available, right? And that is why you can hopefully see that this is a convolution. So if you now, if you not only want one output, but you actually want each of the output of each of the timesteps, this just results in a convolution operation that you can do. And that's why the S4s and so on were so extremely efficient because you can just compute all at the same time. All is linear. All is fixed. Just forward prop is one convolution. Back prop, super easy. Okay, that's it. And essentially, in Mamba, or in structured state spaces, all we're doing is we're making A, B, C, and this delta here input dependent. that's it that's the whole that's the whole thing um you can see this in the algorithm here you can see you have the ssm here a b c go into it in fact sorry a bar and b bar are computed from this thing right here that's exactly the same here and here but now instead of b c this and a being just simple parameters. A is still a parameter. However, everything else you can see, B, C, delta, is computed from the input. And that means, it still means you can do the zoom thing, but the zoom thing, now you have to make that input dependent and specifically, specifically, everything gains a dimension. So here, see, this is the same for each time step. This now is different for each time step, because each time step has a different input, and therefore these things gain an extra dimension. And that's kind of bad, because that makes them L times bigger than previously. So what do we do in order to make that still fast? they differentiate now between two things gpu high bandwidth memory and what's called s-ramp so gpus have two different types of memory i didn't know before this paper but they have the main memory is kind of the slow memory that's this right here that's high bandwidth memory but that's slow even though it's high bandwidth well i guess high bandwidth doesn't mean low ping all right that's slow and then sram is really small but it's really fast and they realize hey if we want to do the matrix multiplications these happen in this sram that's essentially the cache that's the fast stuff uh the the bulk of work is actually moving stuff between the two types of memory moving stuff between the two is the slow thing and therefore we've just made that l times bigger and therefore we made that moving l times slower because the multiplications aren't that slow it's actually moving the stuff around and therefore they come up with a scheme where they don't have to move as much stuff that's essentially it you can look at the code but um in the end it just comes down to that it comes down to moving stuff around moving big stuff around is slow and therefore they say you know instead of computing this kind of stuff this kind of scan inputs in gpu hbm we load the parameters themselves directly to fast sram perform the discretization and recurrence in SRAM and then write the final outputs back to HBM. They save themselves... they actually don't save themselves an L, they save themselves an N. And N is the discretization expansion factor. So during this discretization you kind of need to expand and dimensionality expand some of these things, and they save themselves that expansion, therefore are a lot faster. So I'm not going to go deeper into this except saying what they say down here. They make use of this reduction of data movement plus a recomputation of intermediate states and that results in that the used selective scan layer has the same memory requirements as an optimized transformer implementation with flash attention. And I believe that should give you a good idea of the combination of what kind of is required right here. So again, they can still do the zoom except now the elements are input dependent and therefore they have to do the zoom differently and they do the zoom using not the convolution because the convolution would require the kernel to be constant but they now do it via what's called the prefix sum and the prefix sum is and they call it a parallel scan but it's essentially the thing that computes this a times a times a times b and then a times or c a a a b and then a times a times a times a times b and so on except now of course all of the a's are different right so it's now uh a1 times a2 times a3 times b3 a1 times a2 and also c3 so you can see all of these are now different so you can't do like the tricks from before anymore and what they do is a prefix sum and the prefix sum is just the simplest form is when you have an array like 1 5 9 2 to compute the sum cumulative sum like 1 6 15 17 so that the way you compute this in an efficient manner you can then use this down here for various things it's very simple right and this is useful in a lot of algorithms but to avoid recomputing a lot of this stuff you can use prefix sums to kind of pre-compute all of the sums or in this case all of the multiplications of different things together and then you can use those and for example if you say what's the sum from here to here you can just subtract from 17, you can subtract 6 or 1, sorry 1, and you can say the sum here is 16 without having to compute it again. Same principle goes for how they make this here fast. Scaling laws look really scaly, so they beat perplexity in language modeling, and that is models trained on a pile of 1.3 billion parameters, scales better than all other retention-free models, and it is the first to match the performance of a very strong transformer plus-plus recipe that has now become the standard, particularly as the sequence length grows. So the jury's still out what happens at really large scales, but already at this scale, this looks quite promising. DNA modeling and so on, Mamba superior to other things. Yeah, because long sequence lengths are really the strength of these kinds of models. And again, we'll have to see what the exact trade-off is going to be, whether we need to make the transitions input dependent or not. and yeah you can see that inference throughput on an A100 is good and actually gets more drastic and drastic as the batch size increases when you compare them to transformers all right they have some populations here say Mamba is a strong candidate to be a general sequence model backbone. And lastly, I think I have one more highlighted section where they discuss the intricacies of their efficient implementation. This section is also, if you want to dive deeper into this, you can go into this section, especially they discuss what they transfer, how much elements they transfer, what that costs, so on. So really reducing that memory transfer. And lastly, you can also dive into the code here on github if you do i invite you to look at this mamba simple pi first and in fact there in this code base the same thing is going to be implemented multiple times one time for python one time for gpu and then again one time for inference where you do things recurrently and one time for training where you compute everything kind of at the same time and so you'll find the same code written many many times in different ways i invite you to look at this step function right here which is really really good and just assume you don't have any of the extras so like this causal con 1d update because that gives you a good idea so see there's first an input projection then there is a con 1d like a convolution 1d convolution then there is then the parameters here are this dt they talk about sort of projecting this down and up and kind of putting it through a dimensionality bottleneck the matrix a is is a parameter it's just stored as log a and not as a itself where was it ah where was it oh here then we do the discretization the discretization goes you can see here discretization is done by multiplying this D T to A this D T to B then the recurrence is calculated the state times D A plus X times D B so this is the main recurrence for the hidden state the output is calculated by just multiplying the hidden state by C and And lastly, there's this gating connection in D, which is exactly what we saw in the paper in this architecture diagram. Right, right, right, right. Here, right? So you have projections, 1D convolution, non-linearity, state-space models with the discretization and recurrence computation, gating pathway this is with the matrix d in the code out projection and that's it all right that was it for me for this architecture i hope you got a little bit clearer on what mambo does how it can be used and yeah it's exciting to go forward with these architectures i hope you're having a good time. That was it for me. Merry Christmas and bye-bye.